In a modern world software systems are literally everywhere. These
should cope with very complex scenarios including the ability of
context-awareness and self-adaptability. The concept of roles provide
the means to model such complex, context-dependent systems. In
role-based systems, the relational and context-dependent properties of
objects are transferred into the roles that the object plays in a
certain context. However, even if the domain can be expressed in a
well-structured and modular way, role-based models can still be hard
to comprehend due to the sophisticated semantics of roles, contexts
and different constraints. Hence, unintended implications or
inconsistencies may be overlooked. A feasible logical formalism is
required here. In this setting Description Logics (DLs) fit very well
as a starting point for further considerations since as a decidable
fragment of first-order logic they have both an underlying formal
semantics and decidable reasoning problems. DLs are a well-understood
family of knowledge representation formalisms which allow to represent
application domains in a well-structured way by DL-concepts,
i.e. unary predicates, and DL-roles, i.e. binary predicates. However,
classical DLs lack expressive power to formalise contextual knowledge
which is crucial for formalising role-based systems.

We investigate a novel family of contextualised description logics
that is capable of expressing contextual knowledge and preserves
decidability even in the presence of rigid DL-roles, i.e. relational
structures that are context-independent. For these contextualised
description logics we thoroughly analyse the complexity of the
consistency problem.  Furthermore, we present a mapping algorithm that
allows for an automated translation from a formal role-based model,
namely a Compartment Role Object Model (CROM), into a contextualised
DL ontology. We prove the semantical correctness and provide ideas how
features extending CROM can be expressed in our contextualised DLs. As
final step for a completely automated analysis of role-based models,
we investigate a practical reasoning algorithm and implement the first
reasoner that can process contextual ontologies.
